_Neobacillus driksii_ sp. nov. isolated from a Mars 2020 spacecraft assembly facility and genomic potential for lasso peptide production in _Neobacillus_

ABSTRACT 

During microbial surveillance of the Mars 2020 spacecraft assembly facility, two novel Gram-positive bacterial strains, potentially capable of producing lasso peptides, were identified. Characterization using a polyphasic taxonomic approach, whole-genome sequencing (WGS), and phylogenomic analyses revealed a close genetic relationship among two strains from Mars 2020 cleanroom floors (179-C4-2-HS, 179-J1A1-HS), one strain from the Agave plant (AT2.8), and another strain from wheat-associated soil (V4I25). All four strains exhibited high 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity (>99.2%) and low average nucleotide identity (ANI) with _Neobacillus niacini_ NBRC 15566T, delineating new phylogenetic branches within the genus. Detailed molecular analyses, including gyrB (90.2%) and ANI (86.4%) phylogenies, and digital DNA-DNA hybridization (32.5%), indicated significant divergence from _N. niacini_ NBRC 15566T. Consequently, these strains have been designated _Neobacillus driksii_ sp. nov., with the type strain 179-C4-2-HST (DSM 115941T = NRRL B-65668T). _N. driksii_ is characterized by pleomorphic morphology, growth at 4 to 45 °C, pH range of 6.0 to 9.5, and tolerance to 0.5 to 5% NaCl. The major cellular fatty acids are iso-C15:0 and anteiso-C15:0. The dominant polar lipids include diphosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylethanolamine, and an unidentified aminolipid. Metagenomic analysis within NASA cleanrooms revealed that _N. driksii_ is scarce (17 out of 236 samples).  Genes encoding the biosynthesis pathway for lasso peptides were identified in all _N. driksii_ strains and is not commonly found in other _Neobacillus_ species, except in 7 out of 26 recognized species. This study highlights the unique metabolic capabilities of _N. driksii_, underscoring their potential in antimicrobial research and biotechnology.

